docs(proposal): compositions validating webhook (#3756)
crossplane/crossplane: design/design-doc-composition-validating-webhook.md

  by specific types of patches and a list of`EnvironmentPatches` . Also an
  `alpha` feature, similar implications to what already said for `functions`,
  would require additional information and can invalidate the assumption that
  we render valid Composed Resources if defined.
- `writeConnectionSecretsToNamespace` : the name of the namespace the `Secret`
  containing the connection details should be created into. We could check
  whether it exists already, but that would be against the behaviour Kubernetes
  users are used to, e.g. a `Deployment` mounting a `Secret` which does not
  exist yet is considered valid but remains pending until it’s not created.
- `publishConnectionDetailsWithStoreConfigRef` : a reference by name to a
  `StoreConfig`, we could check that it exists, but similarly to the namespace
  it would go against the behaviour Kubernetes users might be expecting.

### Additional Constraints for the ValidatingWebhook use case

A few constraints that makes validating Compositions from a Validating Webhook
harder w.r.t. the cases mentioned in the Background:

1. Managed Resources defined as `base` and traversed by `patches` might not yet

>    have been deployed when the Composition is being validated.

Reviewer: Having an MR always implies having its CRD deployed, but not having MRs does not give any hint about its CRDs existence. So, it would be more clear if we mentioned what we need.

   validated.
3. We do not have all the required schemas locally, so we should get them from
   the API server, if available.
4. We do not have actual input values supplied from the Composite Resource that
   are required to render valid and applicable Managed Resources.
5. Some `alpha` features could require some additional interactions with
   external systems, e.g. `CompositionFunctions`.

### Solution Proposed

In order to be able to have Compositions properly validated we should cover all
the `resources` parts, while also taking into consideration all the constraints
above.

So, I propose to implement a Composition Validating Webhook by validating each
`resource`'s `patches` and final rendered `Composed Resource`, querying the API
Server to get the needed schemas.

I suggest we avoid validating `bases`, that would require to implement
validation ignoring required fields, as those could be set at a later stage by
patches. Assuming we implement full `patches` type coverage, validating `bases`
per se can be avoided, as any error should either be caught validating the
patches or can be attributed to the `base` itself. But this could be considered

> at a later stage.

Author: Yes, I was just suggesting that now as I didn't want to be too specific with the implementation, but now that I have experimented a little bit more in the POC, I'd say we can state it explicitly, as validating bases per se would be a useless effort.

> at a later stage.

Author: Reworded

To validate `patches`,  we will need to implement ad-hoc validation functions,
because the current patching logic is not taking into consideration schemas, as
it’s dealing directly with unstructured data, therefore not reporting any
schema related error. The code implemented for
[upbound/upjet][upject-validation-code] or
[crossplane-contrib/crossplane-lint][crossplane-lint-validation-code] could be
good starting points for this.

To render the Composed Resources, we will need to refactor the Composite

> resources reconciliation loop, extracting the rendering logic to remove any

Reviewer: > extracting the rendering logic

This could be tricky with the `functions` support since rendering logic would also include running the functions.

Author: Indeed, updated the doc to explicitly mention functions.

side effect it currently has. Which is similar to what has been done in the LSP
[implementation][lsp-validation-code]. This step requires all `patches` to have

> been applied in order to have the final Managed Resource to validate.

Reviewer: > This step requires all `patches` to have been applied in order to have the final Managed Resource to validate

Isn't this already be part of the rendering logic?

> In order to address the possible absence of Managed Resources,

Reviewer: nit: 

```suggestion
In order to address the possible absence of Managed Resource Definitions (CRDs),
```

> CompositeResourceDefinitions or any other required external resource at

Reviewer: > any other required external resource

Definition of Composed resources (whether it is an [MR](https://github.com/upbound/platform-ref-aws/blob/023be259acddd37b32a2e2ee52e0ea9819748c67/package/cluster/network/composition.yaml#L20) or [another XR](https://github.com/upbound/platform-ref-aws/blob/023be259acddd37b32a2e2ee52e0ea9819748c67/package/cluster/composition.yaml#L12)) would always be required if we want to validate their schemas, so MR CRDs or XRD will be needed for schema validation.

However, validation would also always require the `CompositeResource` since we want to render the composed resources and patches refer fields from it. I don't expect having `CompositeResource` instance while installing a `Composition` is possible; most of the time, we install XRD + Composition while setting up the platform but create `CompositeResource`s at a later stage while consuming the platform. So, if we want to validate the rendered resources, I feel like we somehow mock these values. Maybe I am missing something since the VS Code plugin somehow does this. 

Nevertheless, it would be helpful to elaborate a bit on what resources are required at what stage and how we can do the validation in the absence of them.

Author: > Nevertheless, it would be helpful to elaborate a bit on what resources are required at what stage and how we can do the validation in the absence of them.

I updated the doc to reflect a few learnings from the POC, I think at least initially we should just focus on the happy case, which is `strict` mode, as handling partially missing inputs would make the code much more complex.

> However, validation would also always require the `CompositeResource` since we want to render the composed resources and patches refer fields from it. I don't expect having `CompositeResource` instance while installing a `Composition` is possible; most of the time, we install XRD + Composition while setting up the platform but create `CompositeResource`s at a later stage while consuming the platform. So, if we want to validate the rendered resources, I feel like we somehow mock these values. Maybe I am missing something since the VS Code plugin somehow does this.

Yes, working on the POC I came to the same conclusion, mocking missing Composite resources with the minimal set of required fields is a requirement. I updated the doc to reflect that.

validation time we should allow explicitly setting one of 2 modes, `strict` and
`loose`(default) . These should be configurable through an annotation, e.g.
`crossplane.io/composition-validation-mode`, on a Composition or maybe even
globally via a flag, and would respectively imply that missing resources should
result in rejection or be ignored.

> I suggest, at least at the moment, to ignore and fail open if `alpha` features

Reviewer: How would the validator report the failure when ignored?

Author: What do you mean? I meant that in case of alpha features being used by a Composition, if such feature is known to change the final rendered resources, e.g. Functions, the validator should not validate anything and "fail open" in the sense that it should short-circuit and just accept the resource. At least in the first iteration.

Reviewer: The question is independent of alpha features indeed, when we use the `loose`(default) mode, are we planning to let user know that something is wrong (i.e. validation failed). With `strict`, it is clear that we reject the resource with proper error message and user knows what is wrong there.

Author: We could emit warnings, such as "... CRD was not available" or "... used, so no validation performed".

  `alpha` feature, similar implications to what already said for `functions`,
  would require additional information and can invalidate the assumption that
  we render valid Composed Resources if defined.
- `writeConnectionSecretsToNamespace` : the name of the namespace the `Secret`
  containing the connection details should be created into. We could check
  whether it exists already, but that would be against the behaviour Kubernetes
  users are used to, e.g. a `Deployment` mounting a `Secret` which does not
  exist yet is considered valid but remains pending until it’s not created.
- `publishConnectionDetailsWithStoreConfigRef` : a reference by name to a
  `StoreConfig`, we could check that it exists, but similarly to the namespace
  it would go against the behaviour Kubernetes users might be expecting.

### Additional Constraints for the ValidatingWebhook use case

A few constraints that makes validating Compositions from a Validating Webhook
harder w.r.t. the cases mentioned in the Background:

1. The CRDs of the Managed Resources defined as `base` and traversed by
   `patches` might not yet have been created when the Composition is being

>    validated.

Reviewer 2: This makes me wonder whether we should have both a validation webhook and a long-running validation controller.

It seems like a Composition that is valid at creation time (i.e. webhook time) could later become invalid. For example if the CRD for one of the MRs it composes is removed, or (in the case of alpha MRs) there's a breaking schema change.

Such a controller could toggle a `valid` status condition on the `Composition`, preventing it from being selected by XRs.

Author: Fair point, indeed given how complex and powerful Compositions are, there are a lot of possible bad scenarios. 

Right now we have no validation at all and errors are reported only once and if a Composition is selected by an XR. Having a validating Webhook would allow us and users to be at least sure that Compositions are valid at deploy time, if all requirements were met. Which paired with a GitOps approach also will let users also know whether Compositions became invalid for any reason.

Obviously later on we might want to address the run time too and we'll have to decide how to address questions like the following ones:
- what happens if the requirements were not met at deploy time, but are met later on and make the Composition invalid? Successive applies of the Composition will fail, but should we be able to notice it and report it in some way?
- what happens if all requirements were met at deploy time and therefore the resource was fully validated and later on one of the requirements is not satisfied anymore? Successive applies will still succeed, but we'll have less confidence and depending on whether there are already XRs using it or not how should these be handled?
- what if it was fully validated at deploy time and, as you are suggesting, one of the requirements changes and makes the Composition invalid? Successive applies of the Composition will fail, but what should happen for existing and new XRs using it? How are users going to be notified?

Ideally we would want to only accept fully validated Compositions, always know whether a Composition is valid or not, prevent any action that would invalidate a valid Composition and report any error on the Composition itself as soon as possible.

However, given that currently users expect not to have any validation at all, we can not be too aggressive on it, so I'd suggest we start from the Webhook and iterate from there one step at a time.

Reviewer 2: > However, given that currently users expect not to have any validation at all, we can not be too aggressive on it, so I'd suggest we start from the Webhook and iterate from there one step at a time.

Absolutely - I should have been explicit I didn't mean to bring any of this into scope for this current design.

2. The CRD of the Composite Resources specified by `CompositeTypeRef` and
   traversed by `patches` might not yet have been created when the Composition
   is being validated.
3. We do not have all the required CRDs locally, so we should get them from
   the API server, if available.
4. We do not have actual input values supplied from the Composite Resource that
   are required to render valid and applicable Managed Resources.
5. Some `alpha` features could require some additional interactions with
   external systems, e.g. `CompositionFunctions`.

### Solution Proposed

In order to be able to have Compositions properly validated we should cover all
the `resources` parts, while also taking into consideration all the constraints
above.

In order to address the possible absence of Managed Resources' CRDs, Composite
Resources' CRDs or any other required external resource at validation time we
should allow explicitly setting one of 2 modes, `strict` and `loose`(default) .
These should be configurable through an annotation, e.g.
`crossplane.io/composition-validation-mode`, on a Composition or maybe even
globally via a flag, and would respectively imply that any missing resource

> should result in a direct rejection or a possibly incomplete validation.

Reviewer 2: Is there a reason to prefer an annotation to a 'real' field on the Composition (e.g. `spec.validation.policy` or similar)?

Author: I'd go with an annotation for the first iterations as it allows us not have to change the APIs and let us change our mind more easily, we could think of moving it to the spec at a later stage once the UX settles to make it more "official" and easily discoverable.

Reviewer 2: That sounds good to me.

I do recall though that upstream Kubernetes moved away from the practice you described for some reason. Might be worth checking why.

In `loose` mode we should emit warnings in case any of the preconditions for a
check are not met, and skip further validation related to that check.

Regarding the approach, I propose to implement a Composition Validating Webhook
by validating each `resource` and final rendered `Composed

> Resource`, querying the API Server to get the needed schemas.

Reviewer 2: Worth noting that in future I could imagine a composition function validating the final XR before apply, as long as it was the last function in the chain.

Author: Makes sense, that's why Functions should be considered non deterministic and more complex validation logic won't make sense in their presence as suggested below: https://github.com/crossplane/crossplane/pull/3756/files#diff-8dfb220f48da6208755c36731275d4d8ff51209399fedbffd3c2ea3e073fa55fR204

I suggest we avoid validating `bases`. Doing that would require to ignore
validating required fields, as those could be set at a later stage by patches
or transformations. Assuming we implement full `patches` type coverage,
validating `bases` per se can be avoided, as any error should either be caught

> validating the patches or can be attributed to the `base` itself.

Reviewer 2: I agree that full validation of bases can be out of scope (at least at first). Some validation does seem like it would be useful, though. For example:

* Making sure folks aren't setting a field that doesn't exist in the schema (sign of a typo or incorrect indentation).
* Making sure folks aren't setting an unsupported field value (e.g. wrong type, unsupported enum).

Anecdotally I think typos and incorrect indentations in bases are one of the more common things folks run into when writing Compositions.

Reviewer 2: Got it. Per my below comment I didn't realize we had chosen to mock out the XR input. This makes more sense in that light.

To validate `patches`, we will need to implement ad-hoc functions, because the
current patching code is dealing directly with unstructured data and does not
take into consideration schemas at all, therefore not reporting any schema
related error. The code implemented for [upbound/upjet][upject-validation-code]
or [crossplane-contrib/crossplane-lint][crossplane-lint-validation-code] could
be good starting points for this.

To render the Composed Resources, we will need to reuse the Composite resources
reconciliation loop as much as possible, extracting the rendering logic to
remove any write operation it currently performs. Which is similar to what has

> been done in the LSP [implementation][lsp-validation-code].

Reviewer 2: It's not clear to me whether this validation would happen at XR-creation time, or at Composition-creation time. If the latter, does this mean we'll use dummy inputs?

Author: Composition creation time. The assumption is that: "A Composition can be considered valid if all patches and transformations are valid per se, and given a minimal mocked XR according to the XRD schema, produces all valid rendered resources according to each resource's schema". See reference implementation for more details: https://github.com/crossplane/crossplane/pull/3902/files#diff-1681f727532a5c3b92fda0de12dd176ef3d9320676691daf5bb5cb0e4d0221b5R78.

So yes, we would need to mock inputs, mostly the XR, but we might think of mocking also other inputs, e.g. EnvironmentConfigs or decide to let the reconciler use actual ones if present, for read only operations. We did not handle EnvironmentConfigs in the reference implementation at the moment, only mocking the minimal required XR.

Reviewer 2: Got it. It wasn't obvious to me reading the design doc that we had decided to mock inputs. I'll re-read today and see whether I just missed it.

All `patches` will have to be applied in order to have the final Managed
Resource properly validated, so we'll need to provide all the required inputs
to the reconciler, to properly apply them. Inputs could be either actual

> resources available or mocked ones.

Reviewer 2: It sounds like we've decided to use mocked inputs. I think it would be useful to be explicit about that in this document, and explicit about what inputs we'll mock.

            dbInstanceClass: db.t2.small
            masterUsername: masteruser
            engine: postgres
            engineVersion: "12"
            skipFinalSnapshotBeforeDeletion: true
            publiclyAccessible: true
          writeConnectionSecretToRef:
            namespace: crossplane-system
      patches:
        - fromFieldPath: "metadata.uid"
          toFieldPath: "spec.writeConnectionSecretToRef.name"
          transforms:
            - type: string
              string:
                fmt: "%s-postgresql"
        - fromFieldPath: "spec.parameters.storageGB"
          toFieldPath: "spec.forProvider.allocatedStorage"
      connectionDetails:
        - fromConnectionSecretKey: username
        - fromConnectionSecretKey: password
        - fromConnectionSecretKey: endpoint
        - fromConnectionSecretKey: port

```

The Validating Webhook should:

- reject it if in `strict` mode and no `RDSInstance` Managed resource and/or
  `XPostgreSQLInstance` Composite Type is deployed yet
- accept it in any other case

While, any of the errors highlighted in the following invalid example should
result in the Composition being rejected, except if in `loose` mode and both

> `XPostgreSQLInstance` and `RDSInstance` have not yet been deployed.:

Reviewer 2: Doesn't this contradict what is suggested previously?

> I suggest we avoid validating `bases`.
